Add diagram doc for upgrade graphs (#97)
operator-framework/olm-docs: content/en/docs/contribution-guidelines/upgrade-graphs.md

---
title: Upgrade Graphs Diagrams

> linkTitle: Upgrade Graphs

Author: The goal is to use this definition when we need to communicate with users about it in any scenario. So, I changed a little. However, please feel free to propose a better re-phase as well.

> linkTitle: Upgrade Graphs

Author: I changed a little since the goal is to define the representation for also we are able to communicate with users in general.

---

## Standards and definitions

| <div style="align-content: center;">Description</div>   | <div style="align-content: center;width:200px">Diagram Example</div>       | 
|----------|:-------------:|
| bundle which is the head of the channel | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   ID(v0.0.1):::head
{{</mermaid>}} |

> | bundle which is the installed currently | {{<mermaid>}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| bundle which is installed currently | {{<mermaid>}}
```

flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   ID(v0.0.1):::installed
{{</mermaid>}} |
| bundle which can be installed | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   ID(v0.0.1)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| channel | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   subgraph preview
      ID(v0.0.1) 
   end
{{</mermaid>}} |
| default channel | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   subgraph "preview (default)"
      ID(v0.0.1) --> ID2(v0.0.2)
   end
{{</mermaid>}} |

> | replaces action to specify an upgrade path for a project which will replace one version for another. It is defined in the CSV. (eg.`spec.replaces: exampleoperator.v0.0.1`) | {{<mermaid>}}

Author: IMO users want to understand in the reality what means a replace, skips, skipRange, and OCP label. I mean, if we put ourselves in the user's shoes what are the real motivation for someone check this legend? They would be looking for to understand the diagrams to know how they can apply that in their project. Then, if we do not add the examples info by doing this link we will bring complexity to understand what each item actually represents. See that for they achieve this understanding would need to read a lot of other docs and then, using my self as an example here: when I look replace == cvs.spec.replace sit makes all info much more clear. I can easily get what it actually means. 

However, I agree 100% that it has how to improvements. I will try to address your requests as well.

> | replaces action to specify an upgrade path for a project which will replace one version for another. It is defined in the CSV. (eg.`spec.replaces: exampleoperator.v0.0.1`) | {{<mermaid>}}

Author: Hi @anik120, 

>  When looking at a graph, do I need to know what replaces means and where I can provide that information?

IMO yes. Why someone would try to understand a graph if is not to know how to apply it to their projects? Also, in POV the info make much more sense and its understanding is much easier when I am able to check that, for example, a replace means cvs.spec.replaces. Otherwise, we cannot pass the same idea instantaneity and users would need to read a lot of docs. 

However, do you think that we need to describe the image ` An arrow from one operator bundle to another`? I think the goal of this column is to let us make a link between the symbol with what that actually means. But we do not describe the image.

flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) --> B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |

> | skips action to skip one or more specific project versions (1..N). It is defined in the CSV (eg.`spec.skips: exampleoperator.v0.0.2, exampleoperator.v0.0.3`)| {{<mermaid>}}

Reviewer 2: Same thought here: 
```suggestion
| This crow-feet arrow between two bundles represent an upgrade edge from one operator bundle to another, while `skipping` operator bundles in between. `Skipping` operator bundles mean the operator bundle with the incoming edge has implicit incoming edges from the `skipped` bundles. You can find more information about skipping bundle [here](internally link to https://deploy-preview-97--operator-lifecycle-manager.netlify.app/docs/tasks/creating-an-update-graph/#skips)| {{<mermaid>}}
```

flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) x--x |v0.0.2,v0.0.3| B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |

> | skipRange action which specify a range that should not be used to upgrade a specific version to another. It is defined in the CSV. (E.g `annotations.olm.skipRange: '>= 2.0.4 < 3.0.0'`) | {{<mermaid>}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| An arrow with bubbles on either end also represents an upgrade edge from one operator bundle to another, but `skips` a range of operator bundles in between. In other words, the operator bundle with the incoming edge has implicit incoming edges from a range of existing and non-existing operator bundles(that may be included in the future). You can read more about `skipRange` [here]((Internally link to https://deploy-preview-97--operator-lifecycle-manager.netlify.app/docs/tasks/creating-an-update-graph/#skiprange) | {{<mermaid>}}
```

Author: changed.

flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   C(v2.0.3) o--o |>= 2.0.4 < 3.0.0| D(v3.0.1)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| future replace | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) -.-> B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |

> | future skips | {{<mermaid>}}

Reviewer 2: Could you explain a little more on what you mean by `future` skips/replaces etc? Not sure where we'll need to use those.

Author: The future actions are required to describe scenarios where we would like to represent future graph paths. For example, if we need to speak/describe how they can work with CEVs. Then we need to create a diagram with the current scenario and we can demonstrate how it will be in the future.  

Another good case scenario is if we need to explain changes such as for the next future oLM versions the channel A would use the label and how the future versions will be.

flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) x-.-x |v0.0.2,v0.0.3| B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| future skipRange | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   C(v2.0.3) o-.-o |>= 2.0.4 < 3.0.0| D(v3.0.1)
{{</mermaid>}} |

> | OCP label which is defined in the bundle Dockerfile image to define which OCP version(s) the project will be supported. (eg. `LABEL com.redhat.openshift.versions:=v4.7`)|  {{<mermaid>}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| OCP label which is defined in the bundle Dockerfile image to define which OCP version(s) the project will support. (eg. `LABEL com.redhat.openshift.versions:=v4.7`)|  {{<mermaid>}}
```

> | OCP label which is defined in the bundle Dockerfile image to define which OCP version(s) the project will be supported. (eg. `LABEL com.redhat.openshift.versions:=v4.7`)|  {{<mermaid>}}

Reviewer 2: We are actually avoiding mention any red hat specific stuff here (OCP, redhat registry etc) since this is a strictly upstream doc site. So we'll have to use example labels instead.

| head bundle |  `ID(<bundle tag>):::head` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   ID(v0.0.1):::head
{{</mermaid>}} |
| installed bundle |  `ID(<bundle tag>):::installed` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   ID(v0.0.1):::installed
{{</mermaid>}} |
| installable bundle | `ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   ID(v0.0.1)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| channel |  `subgraph <channel name> end` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   subgraph preview
      ID(v0.0.1)
   end
{{</mermaid>}} |
| default channel | `subgraph "<channel name> (default)" end` |{{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   subgraph "preview (default)"
      ID(v0.0.1) --> ID2(v0.0.2)
   end
{{</mermaid>}} |
| replace |`ID(<bundle tag>) --> ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) --> B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |

> | skips | `ID(<bundle tag>) x--x | <versions that should be skiped> | ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| skips | `ID(<bundle tag>) x--x | <versions that should be skipped> | ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
```

flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) x--x |v0.0.2,v0.0.3| B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| skipRange | `ID<bundle tag>) o--o | <range> | ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   C(v2.0.3) o--o |>= 2.0.4 < 3.0.0| D(v3.0.1)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| future replace |`ID(<bundle tag>) -.-> ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) -.-> B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |

> | future skips | `ID(<bundle tag>) x-.-x | <versions that should be skiped> | ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| future skips | `ID(<bundle tag>) x-.-x | <versions that should be skipped> | ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
```

flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) x-.-x |v0.0.2,v0.0.3| B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| future skipRange | `ID<bundle tag>) o-.-o | <range> | ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   C(v2.0.3) o-.-o |>= 2.0.4 < 3.0.0| D(v3.0.1)
{{</mermaid>}} |

> | OCP label |    `ID(<bundle tag> \n fa:fa-tag <opc version range>)` | {{<mermaid>}}

Reviewer 2: Same here, we can't mention OCP

---
title: Channel Upgrade Graphs Legends
linkTitle: Upgrade Graphs Legends
description: >
  Defines the legends for channel upgrade graph representation schemes used. 
---

> By checking this document, you will be able to understand the legends used in the Channel Upgrade Graphs as how to create them. Note that it also can be useful to drawing your own graphs to represent your scenarios if you need a help with and communicate with others. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document enumerates the legends for the graphs that depict channel upgrades throughout this site. Using the legends documented here can help to communicate channel upgrade graphs in a standardized way.
```

## Legends

| <div style="align-text: center;width:200px">Diagram (e.g)</div> | Description |   
|----------|:-------------:|
| {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   ID(v0.0.1):::head

> {{</mermaid>}} | Operator bundle version which is the head of the channel |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{</mermaid>}} | Version of the operator which is the head of a channel different versions are available in |
```

| {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   ID(v0.0.1):::installed

> {{</mermaid>}} | Operator bundle version which is installed currently |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{</mermaid>}} | Version of the operator currently installed on cluster |
```

| {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   ID(v0.0.1)
{{</mermaid>}} | Operator bundle version which is installable |
| {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   subgraph preview
      ID(v0.0.1) 
   end

> {{</mermaid>}} | Operator bundle channel. (eg. from the bundle `annotations.yaml`, `operators.operatorframework.io.bundle.channels.v1: preview` ) |

Reviewer 2: Do we need the reader of this document to have prior knowledge of what our bundle metadata is, what `annotations.yaml` is? Is "A channel versions of the operator are available in" not sufficient?

| {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   subgraph "preview (default)"
      ID(v0.0.1) --> ID2(v0.0.2)
   end

> {{</mermaid>}} | Operator default channel. (eg. from the bundle `annotations.yaml`, `operators.operatorframework.io.bundle.channel.default.v1: stable` ) |

Reviewer 2: Same comment here about `annotations.yaml`

| {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) --> B(v0.0.4)

> {{</mermaid>}} | An upgrade path to replace one operator bundle version for another using the [CSV][csv-definition] `replaces spec. (eg.`spec.replaces: exampleoperator.v0.0.1`). More info: [here][upgrade-path-replaces]. |

Reviewer 2: Same comment here about the CSV. Is it not sufficient to say `An edge from one bundle to another depicts an upgrade path from the bundle with the outgoing edge to the bundle with the incoming edge` 

Basically I'm trying to see if we can talk about these details in this doc just in terms of a graph data structure, so that anyone with a basic understanding of what a graph/tree is can understand this doc without needing any prior knowledge of OLM internals.

Author: Regarding this one. My goal/motivation here is the person check the image/diagram and know how to set up the project directly. Because of this, I’d like to stick with the examples.

| {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) x--x |v0.0.2,v0.0.3| B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} | An upgrade path to skip versions in the upgrade path using the [CSV][csv-definition] `skips` spec. (eg.`spec.skips: exampleoperator.v0.0.2, exampleoperator.v0.0.3`). More info: [here][upgrade-path-skips]. |
| {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   C(v2.0.3) o--o |>= 2.0.4 < 3.0.0| D(v3.0.1)
{{</mermaid>}} |  An upgrade path to skip a range of operator bundle versions using the [CSV][csv-definition] `olm.skipRange` annotation. (E.g `annotations.olm.skipRange: '>= 2.0.4 < 3.0.0'`) More info: [here][upgrade-path-skiprange]. |
| {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) -.-> B(v0.0.4)

> {{</mermaid>}} | Represent the same replace method describe above but for a future scenario |

Reviewer 2: Same here, it'd be nice to talk about what it means for the graph, without mentioning OLM internals

   
   A(v0.0.1) x--x |v0.0.2,v0.0.3| B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| skipRange | `ID<bundle tag>) o--o | <range> | ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   C(v2.0.3) o--o |>= 2.0.4 < 3.0.0| D(v3.0.1)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| future replaces |`ID(<bundle tag>) -.-> ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) -.-> B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| future skips | `ID(<bundle tag>) x-.-x | <versions that should be skipped> | ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   A(v0.0.1) x-.-x |v0.0.2,v0.0.3| B(v0.0.4)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| future skipRange | `ID<bundle tag>) o-.-o | <range> | ID(<bundle tag>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   
   C(v2.0.3) o-.-o |>= 2.0.4 < 3.0.0| D(v3.0.1)
{{</mermaid>}} |
| Index image label  |    `ID(<bundle tag> \n fa:fa-tag <vendor version range>)` | {{<mermaid>}}
flowchart TB
   classDef head fill:#ffbfcf;
   classDef installed fill:#34ebba;
   

>    E(v0.0.2 \n fa:fa-tag ocp=v4.x)

Reviewer 2: Can this `ocp` label be switched for something non-openshift related?

Author: I understand that this feature is valid for community operators as well. But I think it is just OSDK too. have you any suggestion?

Reviewer 3: It's for downstream community operators though. I think we should be doing whatever we can to avoid putting any OCP specific content in our upstream documentation if possible.

Author: Community-operators also has this feature. However, I am not sure if other kind vendors are supported.
